- Grains are the gifts of
the ancient civilizations
to the modern world.
They have become a part
of these civilizations'
enduring legacy.
Quinoa from the Incas,
amaranth from the Aztecs,
maize from the Mayans,
rice from the Chinese.
While these grains
gained international
fame over the years,
there is one that has
remained relatively unknown
to the world.
This grain is called teff,
the Ethiopians'
gift to the world.
Teff with scientific
name Eragrostis tef,
is an annual grass
that originated in the
Ethiopian highlands
and was first domesticated
between 8,000 - 5,000 BC.
Unlike the other grains,
accounts of teff's travel to
other countries are limited.
It is believed that in 1886,
the Royal Botanic Gardens
in England obtained teff
seeds from Ethiopia,
which was then still
called abyssinia,
then distributed
them to its colonies,
India and Australia for
a trial cultivation.
Teff reached the United
States in the 1980's
when Wayne Carlson, a
public health worker,
who worked in Ethiopia for some
time realized that Ethiopia
and his hometown Idaho had
similar geology and climate
and decided to import
and cultivate teff seeds.
His decision proved
to be fruitful,
since he now owns a large
teff company in Idaho
and is referred to as "the
father of American teff".
Teff can grow in a wide
range of soil types,
elevations, and temperature.
The only thing it cannot
tolerate is frost.
It grows up to one
meter in height
with long and narrow leaves.
It has a compact
panigale inflorescence,
with grains as small as 1
to 1.5 millimeters long.
It's actually considered to
be the world's tiniest grain.
It can thrive in
drought-stressed soils,
water-logged soils,
and as well as in
black cotton soils,
and in areas with
the rainfall range
of 300 - 2,500 millimeters.
Teff is not sensitive
to altitudes, either.
Majority of it is grown in areas
between 1,100 - 2,950
meters above sea level.
There are some cultivars
that can thrive
beyond 3,000 meters.
It prefers temperatures as
high as 35 degrees celsius
and it cannot survive
prolonged frost.
Teff is also commonly
used as a standby crop.
Due to its short growing season,
some cultivars mature
between 45 and 60 days.
When there's a growth failure
among main crops like maize,
farmers rely on teff as
an alternative food source
especially during
calamities and disasters.
This makes teff an ideal
crop to fight famine.
Teff varieties are typically
identified through colors,
white, red, and brown.
White teff is the
most in demand variety
and is mainly
exported by Ethiopia.
It is expensive because
its planting requires
more attention.
The red and brown varieties
are easier to grow
compared to the white variety,
so it's not as expensive.
It matures easily, that's
why it is typically used
as a fodder crop
in South Africa.
But because of its
high iron content,
human consumption rate
is slowly increasing.
Even though there is a
prevailing export ban
of unprocessed
grain in Ethiopia,
making it the major producer
of teff in the world,
there are, however,
established teff productions
and industries in countries
like Australia, India, Canada,
and Idaho in the United States.
If national and international
policies would be formulated
for the advancement of teff,
it can also be grown in Mexico,
Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador,
Pakistan, and Nepal.
This may prove beneficial
to the growing Ethiopian
population across the globe.
Teff may not be a significant
grain crop in the world.
Well, not yet.
Its nutritional
profile may just prove
to be competitive enough
to propel this grain
to the ranks of maize,
wheat, and rice.
Ethiopians are known sportsmen,
excelling specifically
in middle and long
distance track events.
With teff contributing
about two-thirds of protein
in a typical Ethiopian diet,
many nutritionists and
scientists are curious as to how
teff's nutritional properties
affect Ethiopians' physique.
One standout quality
of teff is its size.
Because teff grains are
so tiny, refining them,
that is removing the bran
and germ is difficult.
So teff is almost always
milled as a whole grain flour
with its nutrients, minerals,
and vitamins intact.
Here is what 100 grams
of cooked teff can offer.
It has 101 kilocalories of
energy, 3.87 grams of protein,
19.86 grams of carbohydrates,
2.8 grams of fiber.
Aside from the usual
soluble and insoluble fiber
that prevents constipation,
20-40 % of teff's carbohydrates
are considered
resistant starches.
Resistant starches are
another type of fiber
that escapes digestion and
remains in the intestine.
It delays the secretion
of glucose in the blood,
making it beneficial
to diabetics
in managing their
blood sugar levels.
Also, resistant starch
can curb appetite,
act as a natural laxative,
produce good bacteria,
and maintain conducive pH
levels in the intestine
for a healthier and
cleaner digestive system.
Teff also has competitive
mineral and vitamin content.
It has 49 milligrams of
Calcium, 2 milligrams of Iron,
50 milligrams of Magnesium,
120 milligrams of Phosphorous,
107 milligrams of Potassium,
8 milligrams of Sodium,
1.11 milligrams of Zinc,
2.86 milligrams of Manganese,
and 0.23 milligrams of Copper.
It has .183
milligrams of Thiamin,
.033 milligrams of Riboflavin,
.91 milligrams of Niacin,
.097 milligrams of Vitamin B6,
18 micrograms of Folate
and 2 IUs of Vitamin A.
It's a known fact that
phosphorous and calcium
have bone-friendly properties,
but they also promote
healthy nerve and
muscle performance.
Balanced levels
of these minerals
regulate proper muscle
contraction including the heart.
Phosphorous helps in
soothing sore muscles
after strenuous work or exercise
and is vital in the growth,
maintenance, and repair
of tissues in cells.
Diabetes can cause phosphorous
in the body to deplete
and can lead to poor bone,
muscle, and nerve functions.
But since teff has a
low glycemic index,
diabetics can have
enough amounts of
phosphorous in the body
without fear of
increased insulin levels.
Teff's potassium and sodium
help maintain fluid balance
as well as pH levels
within one system.
During metabolism,
various acids are produced
and secreted in the body.
When pH levels are disturbed,
alkaline-based compounds
are released by the
body, specifically
calcium by the bones
to neutralize the acid.
Presence of potassium
neutralizes the acid
before the bones are prompted
to release alkaline compounds,
thus preventing
rapid calcium loss.
Teff also has an impressive
amino acid profile.
It has lysine which is typically
deficient in other grains.
Roles of these
amino acids include
maintenance of healthy
tissues and muscles,
enhancement of the immune system
and antioxidant activity and
production of neurotransmitters
for optimal brain and
cognitive functions.
Whether or not teff
is largely responsible
for the Ethiopians' good
build, one thing is for sure.
It deserves global recognition
for its promising
nutritional values.
Teff is Ethiopia's
most important crop.
Since this grain is almost
exclusive to this country,
it is deeply involved
in the Ethiopians'
traditions and customs.
The upper and lower
classes were differentiated
by the variety of teff they ate.
The rich consumed white teff,
while soldiers and servants
ate the darker grains,
red, brown, and black.
The Ethiopians have
a traditional spongy
sourdough flatbread
called injera or enjera
primarily made from teff flour.
Variance of this bread
are eaten in Somalia,
where it is called canjeero,
and in Yemen where it is
popularly called lahoh.
During the fasting days of
Ethiopian orthodox Tewahedo
Christians, eating meat and
dairy products is prohibited.
People heavily rely on injera
combined with fruits and
vegetables for sustenance
during the holy days of fasting.
Injera may be a bread,
but it is always eaten
with sauces and stews
such as alecha
and the spicy wat.
Ethiopians do not use
utensils to eat ingera.
As a matter of fact,
this bread doubles as
cutlery during meals.
The sauces and stews are
served on top of injera,
making it look like
a platter of stews.
Then using the right hand,
Ethiopians tear a
piece of the bread
and use it to scoop up the
stew or wrap pieces of bread
before putting it
in their mouths.
Injera is also an integral
piece in a uniquely Ethiopian
eating ceremony called Gursha,
which involves a
person feeding another.
The ceremony is
carried out by a person
tearing a piece of ingera,
wrapping meat in it
and gently putting it
in the mouth of another.
People accustomed to
eating with utensils
and from individual plates,
will initially find
this practice a bit
of a culture shock.
For the Ethiopians and
some people of east Africa,
Gursha is an intimate act
of friendship and love,
believing that those who
eat from the same plate
will not betray each other.
The more people
involved in the Gursha,
the stronger the
bond they create.
Washington D.C. has the
largest Ethiopian community
in the United States and to
preserve the taste of home,
many Ethiopians ventured
into entrepreneurship
and opened restaurants offering
authentic Ethiopian dishes
including the injera bread.
People, especially vegetarians,
eventually embrace injera
as part of their diet,
thus creating a steady
increase in demand for teff.
This improved demand for the
grain has opened opportunities
for farmers and
agriculturalists in other places
like Nevada and Kansas.
Teff may still be
relatively unknown,
but modern technology can
definitely work to its advantage
and promote not just
its nutritional values,
but the Ethiopian
culture as well.
In Ethiopia, teff may be
widely used as a cereal,
but in other countries it
is used as a forage crop
due to its short
maturity period,
undemanding planting
requirements,
and of course high
nutritional value.
However, teff's use
as a human food source
is now gradually
expanding from Ethiopia
to places like the United
States and South Africa.
As a matter of fact,
in 1996 the U.S.
National Research Council
had recognized teff's
potential to improve nutrition,
boost food security and
promote rural development.
Ethiopia is the largest
producer of teff in the world,
but its average
yield is still low,
compared to other grains
cultivated in the country.
Due to this low supply, it
failed to meet the demand,
resulting in high
prices from 2007- 2008.
The Ethiopian
government was alarmed
that normal households couldn't
afford this basic commodity
and had to switch
to other cereals.
In 2006 former Prime
Minister Meles Zenawi
imposed an export ban on
raw, unprocessed teff grains
in hopes of addressing
the increasing price,
as well as focus
on teff production
for the country's food security.
The ban is still in effect.
In 2010, the
Ethiopian Agriculture
Transformation Agency
or ATA was established to
focus on the improvement
of teff production
and cultivation.
During a national
workshop in January 2012,
the ATA identified
some key obstacles
hindering improved
teff production.
Poor distribution of
improved seed varieties,
agronomic practices like row
planting are not applied,
poor soil management,
a shortage of post-harvest
processing technologies,
a lack of proper storage system
and a lack of farmer's
access to various markets.
The ATA has already
implemented projects
to address these concerns,
one of which is conducting
hands-on productivity
enhancement demonstrations
among small holder farms
to teach more efficient and
effective farming techniques
such as seedling transplanting
and row planting,
instead of the traditional
method of broadcasting.
The ATA is also focusing
on improving productivity
by harnessing modern and
mechanized farming tools
such as the row
planters, the hoe weeder,
the hoe weeder hand tool
to minimize time consumed
in weeding and the
multi-crop thresher
to reduce post-harvest losses.
Technical experts,
development agents,
and production manuals were
deployed and distributed
to various teff-growing areas,
to facilitate and reinforce
the ATA's efforts.
Though Ethiopia's teff
export policy allows
for the export of
processed teff like flour,
many people believe that
lifting the export ban
on raw teff grains can
benefit the country greatly.
Since demand for
teff is increasing,
income from international trade
and the export of raw
teff grains can contribute
to the country's gross
domestic product or GDP
and to Ethiopia's overall growth
and transformation plants.
Lifting the export ban can
also introduce the small teff
market to more modern
interventions, which can further
improve productivity
to secure food security
not just in Ethiopia
but in the whole world.
Teff may be a 100%
Ethiopian grain,
but that does not mean
that different cultures
should not get the opportunity
to enjoy this grain's mixture
of mild, nutty,
and sweet flavors.
Teff's texture varies depending
on the method
applied in cooking.
For a poppyseed-like texture,
perfect for salads and stews,
cook 1 cup of teff in 1 cup
of water for 6-7 minutes
and let it stand covered for
5 minutes more before serving.
For a creamier
texture like porridge,
cook 1 cup of teff in 3 cups
of water for 20 minutes.
Here's a recipe using
teff flour called
Teff Crepe with
Spinach and Mushroom.
For the crepe, you will
need 1/2 cup of teff flour,
1/2 teaspoon of salt,
1/2 cup of whole milk,
1 large egg and 1
tablespoon of melted butter.
For the filling,
you will need 1 tablespoon
of extra virgin olive oil,
227 grams of sliced mushrooms,
6 cups of fresh baby spinach,
salt, freshly ground black
pepper and parmesan cheese.
First, make the filling.
Heat oil in a large
nonstick skillet or pan
over medium-high heat.
Sauté mushrooms for 5 minutes,
then add spinach, salt,
and pepper and cook
for another minute.
Remove from the pan.
Second, prepare the crepes.
In a medium bowl, combine
teff flour and salt.
Then whisk the milk, egg, and
melted butter in another bowl.
Add the milk
mixture to the flour
and whisk until
it becomes smooth.
Using the same skillet or pan,
pour a quarter cup
of the crepe batter
and tilt it in a circular motion
to spread the batter
thinly and evenly.
Cook for 45 seconds.
Then use a spatula to flip over
and cook the other side
another 30 seconds.
Repeat the same process until
all the batter is used up.
Third, divide the
filling among the crepes.
Roll them and sprinkle
parmesan cheese before serving.
Teff flour is popularly
used in making injera.
The traditional way
of making injera,
usually takes 3-5 days due
to the fermentation process.
Here is an injera recipe you
can finish in 1 1/2 days.
Prepare the following, 1
1/2 cups of teff flour,
2 cups of water, 1/2
teaspoon of baking powder,
oil for the pan, 1/4
teaspoon of salt.
First, ferment the
teff flour this way.
Put the flour and
water in a large bowl.
Stir well, cover with a towel,
place somewhere where
it will not be disturbed
and let it sit for 24 hours.
After 24 hours, stir in
the salt and baking powder.
The mixture will deflate
once you stir it.
Now, it's time to cook.
Heat and oil pan
over medium-heat.
Pour the batter into the pan,
enough to fill the surface
and cover with a lid.
Keeping the moisture
is important
to prevent the
injera from cracking.
Cook for 5-7 minutes or
until the top becomes dry
and the edges begin to curl.
Remove from pan and
repeat the process
until all the batter is used up.
It is clear that teff has
more potential beyond injera
and as a awareness for this
grain continues to rise,
it will not be surprising
if the world gets to enjoy
new and exciting teff-based
meals some time in the future.